Types of alloy steel
There are two kinds of alloy steel – low-alloy steel and high-alloy steel. As mentioned earlier, the composition and proportion of alloying elements 
determine the various properties of alloy steel. Low-alloy steels are the ones which have up to 8% alloying elements whereas high-alloy steels have 
more than 8% alloying elements.

Alloying elements
There are around 20 alloying elements that can be added to carbon steel to produce various grades of alloy steel. These provide different types of 
properties. Some of the elements used and their effects include:


Aluminium – can rid steel of phosphorous, sulfur and oxygen
Chromium – can increase toughness, hardness and wear resistance
Copper – can increase corrosion resistance and harness
Manganese – can increase high-temperature strength, wear resistance, ductility and hardenability
Nickel – can increase corrosion, oxidation resistance and strength
Silicon – can increase magnetism and strength
Tungsten – can increase strength and hardness
Vanadium – can increase corrosion, shock resistance, strength and toughness

Other alloying elements that provide varied properties include bismuth, cobalt, molybdenum, titanium, selenium, tellurium, lead, boron, sulfur, 
nitrogen, zirconium and niobium. These alloying elements can be used singly or in various combinations depending on the properties desired.

Alloy steel products and their applications
There are hundreds of products that can be manufactured with alloy steels of varying compositions. These include alloy steel pipes and tubes, alloy 
steel plates, sheets and coils, alloy steel bars, rods and wires, alloy steel forged fittings, alloy steel buttweld fittings, alloy steel flanges, 
fasteners and more. Alloy steels have many uses in various industries such as automobiles, mining, machinery and equipment, railways,road construction, 
buildings, appliances and off-shore applications.

If carbon% in the iron-carbon mixture is less than 2%, the alloy of iron and carbon is called Steel. And if carbon % in iron-carbon mixture is greater 
than 2%, then the alloy is called Cast Iron. Therefore, the maximum % of carbon that can be present in the any kind of steel is 2%. 
(Sometimes, this limit is taken as 2.14% as we show in Iron Carbon Diagram)
Maximum can be 2.1% and minimum 0.025%.
Depending on % of carbon below this limit, steel can be classified as mild steel, medium carbon steel, high carbon steel etc.

Types of steel based on carbon content:

Mild steel (or low carbon steel)-> upto 0.25%

Medium carbon steel -> 0.25 to 0.60

High carbon steel -> 0.60 to 1.5 (or upto 2%)

Carbon steel is a steel with carbon content from about 0.05 up to 2.1 percent by weight. The definition of carbon steel from the American Iron and 
Steel Institute (AISI) states:

no minimum content is specified or required for chromium, cobalt, molybdenum, nickel, niobium, titanium, tungsten, vanadium, zirconium, or any other 
element to be added to obtain a desired alloying effect;
the specified minimum for copper does not exceed 0.40 per cent;
or the maximum content specified for any of the following elements does not exceed the percentages noted: manganese 1.65 per cent; silicon 0.60 per 
cent; copper 0.60 per cent.[1]

Tantalum is a rare, hard, blue-gray, lustrous transition metal that is highly corrosion-resistant. It is part of the refractory metals group, which 
are widely used as minor components in alloys.

Tantalum, always together with the chemically similar niobium,

Low-carbon steels contain up to 0.30% carbon. A majority of this class of steel is flat-rolled products like sheet or strip; usually they are in a 
cold-rolled and annealed condition. These steels have high formability as they contain very low carbon, usually less than 0.10% C, with up to 0.4% Mn.

These generally have less than 1.8% nickel, less than 6% chromium, and less than 0.65% molybdenum. The tensile strength range is from 450–620 N mm−2 
up to 850–1000 N mm−2.

The low-alloy steels are distinguished by additions of chromium, molybdenum, and, in some cases, nickel. These elements are added in concentrations of 
a few percent, but the total alloy content is generally less than 5 wt%.

There are two groups of vanadium steel alloys. Vanadium high-carbon steel alloys contain 0.15% to 0.25% vanadium, and high-speed tool steels (HSS) 
have a vanadium content of 1% to 5%.

Most high-strength steel alloys (for example, 41xx steels) contain 0.25% to 8% molybdenum.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Effects of Mn, P, S, Si & V on the Mechanical Properties of Steel:
 

Manganese, 25Mn54.938049 
Manganese increases hardenability and tensile strength of steel, but to a lesser extent than carbon. It is also able to decrease the critical cooling 
rate during hardening, thus increasing the steels hardenability much more efficient than any other alloying elements. Manganese also tends to increase
 the rate of carbon penetration during carburizing and acts as a mild deoxidizing agent. However when too high carbon and too high manganese accompany 
 each other, embrittlement sets in. Manganese is capable to form Manganese Sulphide (MnS) with sulphur, which is beneficial to machining. At the same 
 time, it counters the brittleness from sulphur and is beneficial to the surface finish of carbon steel.
For welding purposes, the ratio of manganese to sulphur should be at least 10 to 1. Manganese content of less than 0.30% may promote internal porosity 
and cracking in the weld bead, cracking can also result if the content is over 0.80%. Steel with low Manganese Sulphide ratio may contain sulphur in 
the form of iron Sulphide (FeS), which can cause cracking (a “hot-short” condition) in the weld

Phosphorus, 15P30.973761
Phosphorus increases strength and hardness, but at the expense of ductility and impact to toughness, especially in higher carbon steels that are 
quenched and tempered. As such its content in most steel is limited to a maximum of 0.05%. Phosphorus prevents the sticking of light-gage sheets when 
it is used as an alloy in steel. It strengthens low carbon steel to a degree, increases resistance to corrosion and improves machinability in 
free-cutting steels. In terms of welding, phosphorus content of over 0.04% makes weld brittle and increases the tendency to crack. The surface tension
 of the molten weld metal is lowered, making it difficult to control.

Sulphur, 16S32.065
Sulphur improves machinability but lowers transverse ductility and notched impact toughness and has little effects on the longitudinal mechanical 
properties. Its content is limited to 0.05% in steels but is added to freecutting steels in amount up to 0.35% with the manganese content increased to 
counter any detrimental effects since sulphur is beneficial to machining. For welding, weldability decreases with increasing sulphur content. Sulphur 
is detrimental to surface quality in low carbon and low manganese steels and it promotes hot shortness in welding with the tendency increasing with 
increased sulphur.

Silicon, 14Si28.0855
Silicon increases strength and hardness but to a lesser extent than manganese. It is one of the principal deoxidizers used in the making of steels to 
improve soundness, i.e. to be free from defects, decays or damages. Silicon is present in all steels to a certain extent. Its content can be up to 4% 
for electric sheets that are widely used in alternating current magnetic circuits.
In welding, silicon is detrimental to surface quality, especially in the low carbon, resulphurized grades. It aggravates cracking tendencies when the 
carbon content is fairly high. For best welding condition, silicon content should not exceed 0.10%. However, amounts up to 0.30% are not as serious as
 high sulphur or phosphorus content.
For galvanizing purposes, steels containing more than 0.04% silicon can greatly affect the thickness and appearance of the galvanized coating. 
This will result in thick coatings consisting mainly zinc-iron alloys and the surface has a dark and dull finish. But it provides as much corrosion 
protection as a shiny galvanized coating where the outer layer is pure zinc.

Vanadium, 23V50.9415s
Vanadium is used to refine grain size. Steels containing vanadium have a much finer grain structure than steels of similar compositions without 
vanadium. It decreases the rate of grain growth during heat treating processes and raises the temperature at which grain coarsening sets in thus 
improving the strength and toughness of hardened and tempered steels. Contents up to 0.05% increases hardenability while larger amounts tend to reduce 
hardenability due to the formation of carbide. Vanadium lessens softening on tempering and induces secondary hardness on high speed steels.
Vanadium is used in nitriding, heat resisting, tool and spring steels together with other alloying elements. It is also being utilized in 
ferrite/pearlite microalloy steels to increase hardness through carbonitride precipitation strengthening of the matrix.


P is added along with sulphur (S) to enhance the machinability of steels. Higher P is specified in low C free machining steels to improve 
machinability. Such steels have limits on P content as 0.07 % to 0.12 % unless the steels are also leaded (Pb addition), in which case P content is 
limited to only 0.04 % to 0.09 % P. The latter content of P is also applicable when C in steel is 0.10 %.

Phosphorus in Steels
 Satyendra September 18, 2014 0 Comments Corrosion Resistance, Galvanized, Phosphorus, Steel, Strength, Zinc


 

Phosphorus in Steels

 Phosphorus (P) (atomic number 15 and atomic weight 30.974) has density of 1.82 gm/cc. It has a melting point of 44.1 deg C and boiling point of 
 280 deg C. The iron (Fe) – P phase diagram is shown in Fig 1.

Fe-P phase diagram

Fig 1 Fe- P phase diagram

P is normally considered an undesirable impurity in steels. It is present in varying concentrations in iron ore, is retained in hot metal, but is 
eliminated early in the steelmaking process. P oxidizes readily and is removed from steel as P2O5, which is taken up by the oxidizing slag, before the 
oxidation of carbon takes place. Carryover of any P2O5 containing oxidizing slag can result in P reversion to the steel in subsequent steelmaking 
operations.



 

In normal commercial steels, residual P content is usually  at a level of 0.05 % max, but concentrations as low as 0.005 % are not unusual. P is 
readily removed only in basic steelmaking processes. Acidic processes must therefore begin with low P raw materials. It was the ability to remove this
 element that led to the widespread adoption of the steelmaking by the basic open hearth, electric arc furnace, basic Bessemer converter and 
 subsequently basic oxygen furnace (BOF) processes.

P is sometimes added intentionally to the steel to improve strength, machinability and atmospheric corrosion resistance. P is added to the steel in 
the form of ferro-phosphorus (Fe-P), containing 23 % to 26 % P. Fe-P fines are usually briquetted, after using a binder. Fe-P is capable of oxidizing 
the residual silicon to silica, thus enabling it to float out to the ladle slag during steel making. The intent is to reduce the concentration of 
residual siliceous inclusions, which are detrimental to machinability. Fe-P is normally added to the steel teeming ladle only after the steel has been
 thoroughly deoxidized. Recovery of P is normally in the range of around 90 % to 95 %.

Although an iron phosphide (Fe3P) is known to exist, it is never present at the P contents encountered in commercial steels. Fe3P is common in irons 
as steadite phase (Fe/Fe3P) which is a hard structural constituent of cast iron consisting of the eutectic of ferrite and Fe3P. The composition of the 
eutectic is 10.2 % P and 89.8 % Fe.

In steels, P exists exclusively as a solid solution in ferrite. It is the most potent ferrite strengthener after carbon (C). The addition of only 
0.17 % phosphorus increases both the yield and tensile strength of low C sheet steel by about 62 MPa while also improving the bake hardening response 
and deep drawability. Because of these properties, rephosphorized high strength steels are widely used for cold forming applications.

P coarsens the grain size and tends to produce massive, undesirable segregates. Aside from its grain coarsening property, P has an intrinsically 
positive effect on hardenability, but this feature cannot be exploited at the low concentrations present even in rephosphorized steels. In certain 
high C steels such as spring steel, the limits on P must be adhered to in order to prevent the formation of high concentrations of martensite.

P increases strength and hardness and decreases ductility and notch impact toughness of steels. The adverse effects on ductility and toughness are 
greater in quenched and tempered higher C steels. P levels are normally controlled to low levels (maximum of 0.05 %). P prevents the sticking of light 
gauge sheets when it is used as an alloy in steel.

P is added along with sulphur (S) to enhance the machinability of steels. Higher P is specified in low C free machining steels to improve 
machinability. Such steels have limits on P content as 0.07 % to 0.12 % unless the steels are also leaded (Pb addition), in which case P content is 
limited to only 0.04 % to 0.09 % P. The latter content of P is also applicable when C in steel is 0.10 %.

Detrimental effects of P in steel include various forms of embrittlement which reduce the toughness and ductility. The most familiar example in this 
category is the classic phenomenon of temper embrittlement in heat treated low alloy steels resulting from segregation of phosphorus and other 
impurities at prior austenite grain boundaries.

P can be present in some of high strength low alloy (HSLA) steels up to 0.15 % for increased strength. Whereas P is usually considered to be an 
embrittling element in steel, substantial amounts can be tolerated when C is less than 0.15 %. P also improves atmospheric corrosion resistance in 
mild and low alloy steels, especially when copper (Cu) is also present.

Phosphorus in Steels
 Satyendra September 18, 2014 0 Comments Corrosion Resistance, Galvanized, Phosphorus, Steel, Strength, Zinc


 

Phosphorus in Steels

 Phosphorus (P) (atomic number 15 and atomic weight 30.974) has density of 1.82 gm/cc. It has a melting point of 44.1 deg C and boiling point of 
 280 deg C. The iron (Fe) – P phase diagram is shown in Fig 1.

Fe-P phase diagram

Fig 1 Fe- P phase diagram

P is normally considered an undesirable impurity in steels. It is present in varying concentrations in iron ore, is retained in hot metal, but is 
eliminated early in the steelmaking process. P oxidizes readily and is removed from steel as P2O5, which is taken up by the oxidizing slag, before the
 oxidation of carbon takes place. Carryover of any P2O5 containing oxidizing slag can result in P reversion to the steel in subsequent steelmaking 
 operations.



 

In normal commercial steels, residual P content is usually  at a level of 0.05 % max, but concentrations as low as 0.005 % are not unusual. P is 
readily removed only in basic steelmaking processes. Acidic processes must therefore begin with low P raw materials. It was the ability to remove this 
element that led to the widespread adoption of the steelmaking by the basic open hearth, electric arc furnace, basic Bessemer converter and 
subsequently basic oxygen furnace (BOF) processes.

P is sometimes added intentionally to the steel to improve strength, machinability and atmospheric corrosion resistance. P is added to the steel in 
the form of ferro-phosphorus (Fe-P), containing 23 % to 26 % P. Fe-P fines are usually briquetted, after using a binder. Fe-P is capable of oxidizing 
the residual silicon to silica, thus enabling it to float out to the ladle slag during steel making. The intent is to reduce the concentration of 
residual siliceous inclusions, which are detrimental to machinability. Fe-P is normally added to the steel teeming ladle only after the steel has been 
thoroughly deoxidized. Recovery of P is normally in the range of around 90 % to 95 %.

Although an iron phosphide (Fe3P) is known to exist, it is never present at the P contents encountered in commercial steels. Fe3P is common in irons 
as steadite phase (Fe/Fe3P) which is a hard structural constituent of cast iron consisting of the eutectic of ferrite and Fe3P. The composition of the
 eutectic is 10.2 % P and 89.8 % Fe.

In steels, P exists exclusively as a solid solution in ferrite. It is the most potent ferrite strengthener after carbon (C). The addition of only 
0.17 % phosphorus increases both the yield and tensile strength of low C sheet steel by about 62 MPa while also improving the bake hardening response 
and deep drawability. Because of these properties, rephosphorized high strength steels are widely used for cold forming applications.

P coarsens the grain size and tends to produce massive, undesirable segregates. Aside from its grain coarsening property, P has an intrinsically 
positive effect on hardenability, but this feature cannot be exploited at the low concentrations present even in rephosphorized steels. In certain 
high C steels such as spring steel, the limits on P must be adhered to in order to prevent the formation of high concentrations of martensite.

P increases strength and hardness and decreases ductility and notch impact toughness of steels. The adverse effects on ductility and toughness are 
greater in quenched and tempered higher C steels. P levels are normally controlled to low levels (maximum of 0.05 %). P prevents the sticking of light 
gauge sheets when it is used as an alloy in steel.

P is added along with sulphur (S) to enhance the machinability of steels. Higher P is specified in low C free machining steels to improve 
machinability. Such steels have limits on P content as 0.07 % to 0.12 % unless the steels are also leaded (Pb addition), in which case P content is 
limited to only 0.04 % to 0.09 % P. The latter content of P is also applicable when C in steel is 0.10 %.

Detrimental effects of P in steel include various forms of embrittlement which reduce the toughness and ductility. The most familiar example in this 
category is the classic phenomenon of temper embrittlement in heat treated low alloy steels resulting from segregation of phosphorus and other 
impurities at prior austenite grain boundaries.

P can be present in some of high strength low alloy (HSLA) steels up to 0.15 % for increased strength. Whereas P is usually considered to be an 
embrittling element in steel, substantial amounts can be tolerated when C is less than 0.15 %. P also improves atmospheric corrosion resistance in 
mild and low alloy steels, especially when copper (Cu) is also present.

Two other forms of intergranular embrittlement can occur in steels containing P in the normal range of 0.008 % to 0.025 %. In both types, fracture 
follows the ferrite grain boundaries (instead of prior austenite grain boundaries) weakened by the segregation of P during slow cooling of coiled 
strip or during final annealing after cold rolling. In one type, planar oriented cracking (separation) is observed in the production of HSLA strip for 
line pipe. In the other type, brittle fracture may occur during secondary cold working of sheet steel that has previously been deep drawn (with 
elongated ferrite grains creating planes of relative weakness) or during service of the drawn part.

P in the steel chemistry has an additional effect on its reactivity within molten zinc (Zn). In order to control coating thicknesses and surface 
finish, P is specified as 0.02 % maximum and if possible 0.01 % maximum. P content above 0.02 % causes Zn coatings to be excessively thick 
(greater than 200 micrometer), brittle and subject to chipping and/or flaking due to mechanical damage. P segregates during solidification 
(segregation coefficient is 0.02). Presence of P impairs the plastic properties.

In terms of welding, P content of over 0.04 % makes weld brittle and increases the tendency to crack. The surface tension of the molten weld metal is 
lowered, making it difficult to control.

Sawhill and Baker compared the resistance spot welding characteristics of plain carbon steel with those of rephosphorized steel containing 0.04 % to 
0.12 % of P. Adequate weld button size, strength and toughness were obtained over a practical range of welding conditions. To obtain an adequate 
button size over a large range of weld currents, electrode face diameters and welding times need to be increased slightly compared with those of plain 
C steels. Others also report excellent weldability of rephosphorized Aluminum (Al) killed steel and galvannealed titanium (Ti) stabilized ultra low 
carbon (ULC) steel, although it has been suggested that the P content be limited to approximately 0.1 %.

Many properties are sensitive to the P content and the effect of P depends on the processing method. In addition, processes such as galvannealing are 
sensitive to the P content of the base steel. Therefore, tight control of the P level and choosing the proper process route are important if 
consistent properties are to be obtained and embrittlement problems avoided.

Phosphatability is found to be markedly improved by the addition of 0.07 % P to niobium (Nb) bearing ULC steel. In addition, P markedly improves the 
corrosion resistance of phosphated steel. The addition of P to certain enameling steel grades has been reported to enhance fish scaling resistance and 
after-fire strength. Furthermore, P accelerates etching and nickel (Ni) deposition rates during pre-enameling treatments. Although these latter 
effects may be advantageous, process control difficulties can arise if the P content is not consistently controlled to a predetermined level.

Steels with very low phosphorus:
The P requirement for this category ranges up to about 0.02 %. Steels with very low maximum P requirements include those that are particularly 
susceptible to embrittlement. These are mainly HSLA steels containing elements like manganese (Mn), silicon (Si), Ti, Nb, vanadium (V), 
molybdenum (Mo), and Chromium (Cr) etc.

-----------------------------------********************-----------------------------------------------

Low iron steel:

1. iron predominates by weight over each of the other contained elements
2.the carbon content is 2% or less,by weight
3. none of the elements below exceeds the quantityby weight:

carbon- 0.025-2.1 (0.0900	0.3400)
manganese- 1.80% (0.4200	1.4800)
silicon- 1.50% (max 2.0) (0.1800	0.5200)
copper- 0.40-1.00%	(0.0000	0.2500)
aluminium- 0.50%	(0.0020	0.0500)
chromium- 1.25% --(max 1.45) (0.0000	1.3100)
cobalt- 0.30%
lead- 0.40%
nickel- 1.25%  (max-9.5) (0.0000	0.6000)
tungsten- 0.30%
boron- 0.012%
molybdenum- 0.10% --(max 0.52)	(0.0050	1.3500)
niobium- 0.10%	(0.0000	0.0017)
titanium- 0.41%
vanadium- 0.15% --	(0.0000	0.3000)------------remaining
zirconium- 0.15
p-		max(0.05)	(0.0060	0.0300)	should be less than 0.04%
s-	max(0.05)		(0.0030	0.0220)
n-			(0.0025	0.0150)
--------------------------*************************------------------------------------

f.campbell page.370



